PanicAtTheDeadline
README

## Software and Platform
The software used in this project was R and Python.

Necessary libraries for R include:
- tidyverse
- reshape2
- GGally

Necessary packages for Python include:
- Pandas
- NumPy
- Matplotlib
- Seaborn
- Sci-Kit Learn

The platforms used for this project were Windows and Mac.

## Documentation Map
DATA:
- OriginalAirQualityUCI.csv = original data used in exploratory analysis and modeling
- cleaned_air_quality(eda).csv = cleaned data used in exploratory analysis
- cleaned_air_quality(model).csv = cleaned data used in model training and validation
- predicted_airquality_next_month.csv = predicted concentrations of air pollutants generated by the model for the next month
- metadata.md = outlines dataset establishment

OUTPUT:
- C6H6(GT)_prediction.png = graph of predicted concentrations of C6H6 for the next month
- C6H6(GT)_validation.png = graph of predicted concentrations of C6H6 compared to actual concentrations of C6H6
- CO(GT)_prediction.png = graph of predicted concentrations of CO for the next month
- CO(GT)_validation.png = graph of predicted concentrations of CO compared to actual concentrations of CO
- NO2(GT)_prediction.png = graph of predicted concentrations of NO2 for the next month
- NO2(GT)_validation.png = graph of predicted concentrations of NO2 compared to actual concentrations of NO2
- NOx(GT)_prediction.png = graph of predicted concentrations of NOx for the next month
- NOx(GT)_validation.png = graph of predicted concentrations of NOx compared to actual concentrations of NOx
- EDA1.pdf = pairwise relationships between air quality variables from exploratory analysis
- EDA2.pdf = correlation heatmap of sensor variables from exploratory analysis
- EDA3.pdf = graph of temperature vs. relative humidity from exploratory analysis
- validation_metrics.png = R^2 and RMSE values for air pollutant concentration predictions compared to actual concentrations

SCRIPTS:
- Project2-DataCleaning.R = cleans original data file for exploratory analysis
- Project2_exploratory_data.R = exploratory analysis
- air_quality_model.py = cleans original data file for model training, creates and trains model, validates model, and predicts air pollutant concentrations for the next month

Other files:
- LICENSE: MIT License
- README: Explains the contents of the repository

## Instructions for reproduction
1. Download OriginalAirQualityUCI.csv to a known location on your computer.
2. Ensure that R and Python are installed, as well as all the necessary libraries and packages.
3. Download Project2-DataCleaning.R and Project2_exploratory_data.R to the same location as the data file. Run Project2-DataCleaning.R first, to clean the data and save it to a file. Run Project2_exploratory_data.R next, to complete the exploratory analysis using the cleaned data and generate the three EDA graphs contained in the OUTPUT folder.
4. Download air_quality_model.py to the same location as the other files. Run the script to clean the original data for model training, create and train a Random Forest model, validate the model, and predict air pollutant concentrations for the next month. The script will generate a cleaned data file, graphs for model validation and next month prediction, a table of R^2 and RMSE values for predicted vs actual pollutant concentrations, and a data file containing the predicted air pollutant concentrations for the next month.
